RationaleMCP/0037/resource-directory.md, before:

# The _package-resources_ directory

Consider the following reference to an external resource:
- _modelica:/Modelica/Electrical/Analog?resource=media/foo.png_

The URI path part is the class reference, and could take different forms, as described in [modelica-uris.md](modelica-uris.md).  The referenced class is denoted _current class_, here `Modelica.Electrical.Analog`.

Here, the _media/foo.png_ is a relative file system path that is resolved within a resource directory associated with the current class.  The details of this mapping for the deprecated _host_ form of a Modelica URI are omitted here; the following only applies to the non-deprecated forms, when the current Modelica package is stored in a file system hierarchy:
- The fully qualified class name of the current class (after resolving any _relclass_ with respect to the class tree context) is mapped to a nested directory structure, with the constant directory name _resources.d_ (alternatively _package-resources_) appended.
- The relative file system path is relative to _resources.d_ and may not contain the special path segments "." or "..".

Note that the period (".") in the name _resources.d_ makes it distinguishable from a Modelica identifier.  In combination with the constraints on the relative file system path, this implies that that the referenced resourse resides inside the _resources.d_ directory of the class, and that any Modelica URI referencing this resource must do so via reference to the current class.

In the example Modelica URI above, assume `Modelica` is stored in _/Users/jdoe/modelica-packages/Modelica-4.3.2/Modelica_.  Then, the resolved external resource is:
- _/Users/jdoe/modelica-packages/Modelica-4.3.2/Modelica/Electrical/Analog/resources.d/media/foo.png_

Note that the mapping of the fully qualified class name to a directory is the same regardless of whether the package itself uses a directory hierarchy for storage — the directory hierarchy for external resources is fixed, and it is only one of several options for the package itself to be stored in the same hierarchy.

## Special resource directories

The specification is currently giving special meaning to two external resource directores, specified using the deprecated form of Modelica URIs:
- _modelica://ModelicaLibraryName/Resources/Include_
- _modelica://ModelicaLibraryName/Resources/Library_

As these get deprecated with this MCP, the following replacements are suggested:
- _modelica:~?resource=Include_
- _modelica:~?resource=Library_

To use _Include_ and _Library_ directories associated with the top level package instead of the encapsulation barrier, there are at least two natural possibilities:
- Introduce something like a double tilde for reference to the current top level package:
  - _modelica:~~?resource=Include
- Redefine the single tilde to reference the top level package rather than the encapsulation barrier.
- Revert to the old strategy of a symbolically package-dependent URI:
  - _modelica:/ModelicaLibraryName?resource=Include

Commit message:

Clarify resources.d location for classes not stored in a directory

RationaleMCP/0037/resource-directory.md, after:

# The _package-resources_ directory

Consider the following reference to an external resource:
- _modelica:/Modelica/Electrical/Analog?resource=media/foo.png_

The URI path part is the class reference, and could take different forms, as described in [modelica-uris.md](modelica-uris.md).  The referenced class is denoted _current class_, here `Modelica.Electrical.Analog`.

Here, the _media/foo.png_ is a relative file system path that is resolved within a resource directory associated with the current class.  The details of this mapping for the deprecated _host_ form of a Modelica URI are omitted here; the following only applies to the non-deprecated forms, when the current Modelica package is stored in a file system hierarchy:
- The fully qualified class name of the current class (after resolving any _relclass_ with respect to the class tree context) is mapped to a nested directory structure, with the constant directory name _resources.d_ (alternatively _package-resources_) appended.
- The relative file system path is relative to _resources.d_ and may not contain the special path segments "." or "..".

Note that the period (".") in the name _resources.d_ makes it distinguishable from a Modelica identifier.  In combination with the constraints on the relative file system path, this implies that that the referenced resourse resides inside the _resources.d_ directory of the class, and that any Modelica URI referencing this resource must do so via reference to the current class.

In the example Modelica URI above, assume `Modelica` is stored in _/Users/jdoe/modelica-packages/Modelica-4.3.2/Modelica_.  Then, the resolved external resource is:
- _/Users/jdoe/modelica-packages/Modelica-4.3.2/Modelica/Electrical/Analog/resources.d/media/foo.png_

Note that the mapping of the fully qualified class name to a directory is the same regardless of whether the package itself uses a directory hierarchy for storage — the directory hierarchy for external resources is fixed, and it is only one of several options for the package itself to be stored in the same hierarchy.  In particular, it does not matter whether the top level file is _package.mo_ or a file named according to the class it contains.  For example, consider the top level function `Foo` stored in  _/Users/jdoe/modelica-packages/Foo.mo_.  Then this is the location of the resource _modelica:/Foo?resource=media/foo.png_:
- _/Users/jdoe/modelica-packages/Foo/resources.d/media/foo.png_

## Special resource directories

The specification is currently giving special meaning to two external resource directores, specified using the deprecated form of Modelica URIs:
- _modelica://ModelicaLibraryName/Resources/Include_
- _modelica://ModelicaLibraryName/Resources/Library_

As these get deprecated with this MCP, the following replacements are suggested:
- _modelica:~?resource=Include_
- _modelica:~?resource=Library_

To use _Include_ and _Library_ directories associated with the top level package instead of the encapsulation barrier, there are at least two natural possibilities:
- Introduce something like a double tilde for reference to the current top level package:
  - _modelica:~~?resource=Include
- Redefine the single tilde to reference the top level package rather than the encapsulation barrier.
- Revert to the old strategy of a symbolically package-dependent URI:
  - _modelica:/ModelicaLibraryName?resource=Include
