RationaleMCP/0031/initialization.md, before:

# Initialization of variables

The concepts used to define how a variable is initialized are different in Flat Modelica compared to full Modelica.  What is described here is thus a replacement for what in full Modelica is a combination of `final`, `start`, `fixed`, declaration equation, and `initial equation`.  The goal is to reduce the number of concepts involved, and making it more clear how the initialization problem is parameterized (that is, what freedom there is to steer the initialization after translation by setting initialization parameters).

The `initial equation` concept is the same in Flat Modelica as in full Modelica, and any `initial equation` in a full Modelica model will be preserved in the Flat Modelica model.  However, the Flat Modelica model may contain additional `initial equation` coming from the rewriting of other concepts.

## Benefits

To not share the full Modelica initialization model means that there will be a price in terms of lack of specification reuse between full Modelica and Flat Modelica.  The benefits of the new initialization model that make it worth the price include:
- The Flat Modelica initalization model relies more on the use of equations, making more of the initialization explicit in the model.
- The possibility to alter start values after translation is more explicit.
- Not using the `start` attribute means that we can get rid of one more variable attribute with non-constant variability.  This leaves only the potential need for `nominal` to be discrete-time, but it should be possible to get rid of in a similar manner to `start`.

Drawbacks:
- Not using the `start` attribute means that we cannot embedd this information in a type; something like a record with equations would be needed to bundle an equation for `start('v')` with the variable `'v'` in a type.
- Not using attributes `start` and `fixed` means more separation of the declaration of a variable and the things involved in its initialization.

## Limitations

Since a constant in Flat Modelica can always be evaluated during translation, constants are excluded from the current discussion of variable initialization.

The initialization of variables described here is currently restricted to non-discrete-time `Real` variables `'v'`, with no appearance of `pre('v')` in the model equations.  Generalization to discrete-time variables and general handling of `pre` should be made analogously to full Modelica, but the details have not yet been considered.

## Causal equation

In the following, an equation in the form
```
equation /* or 'initial equation' */
  <var> := <expr>;
```
is an equation with prescribed causality, meaning that the perfect matching rule is only allowed to match the equation to the variable on the left hand side, and that the variability of `<expr>` must not exceed the variability of `<var>`.

When `<var>` is a parameter, it is illegal for the causal equation to end up in an equation system together with other equations.  This is a natural way to capture the full Modelica requirement that the must not be any cyclic dependencies between parameters.

When a causal equation exists with `<var>` on the left hand side, we say that `<var>` _has a causal equation_.  Determining the set of variables having causal equation just requires a scan of the model equations, and testing whether a variable has a causal equation then becomes a constant time operation.

## Flat Modelica variable initialization

The initialization of the `Real` variable `'v'` is described using the associated _initialization parameters_ `start('v')` and `guess('v')`.  The initialization parameters are not declared separately, but exist implicitly for any non-constant variable `'v'`.  (Here, `start('v')` takes the role of the full Modelica built-in attribute `start`.)  There are no built-in attributes of `'v'` involved in the initialization process.

The initialization parameters must be determined by causal initial equations.  When an initialization parameter doesn't have a causal equation, the following are used:
```
initial equation
  /* Default causal equation for start('v') */
  start('v') := 0.0;

  /* Default causal equation for guess('v') */
  guess('v') :=
    if userOverridesStart('v') then
      getUserStart('v')
    else
      start('v');
```

Here `userOverridesStart` and `getUserStart` represent tool-specific ways to set parameters of the translated model's initialization problem.

Similar to causal equations for parameters, a causal equations for an initialization parameter may not end up in an equation system together with other equations.  Among other, this means that solving for the initialization parameters will never require guess values for the initialization parameters themselves.

(Note that providing a non-causal equation that can only be solved for, say, `start('v')` will result in an overdetermined initialization problem, as the addition of the default causal equation will result in two equations that can only be solved for the same variable.)

Like in full Modelica, the initialization equations provided by a Flat Modelica model are generally forming an underdetermined system of equations for the initialization of all variables.  The given equations are extended with default
equations in the following form, so that a well-determined (balanced) system of equations is obtained:
```
'v' := guess('v');
```
(The default equation could also be given as a non-causal equation, as the known existence of a causal equation for `guess('v')` implies that the default equation would only be possible to solve for `'v'`.)

In addition, if `'v'` needs a guess value for initialization, the guess is taken from `guess('v')`.  Hence, any equation where `'v'` occurs has a hidden dependency on the causal equation for `guess('v')`.  Since the causal equation for `guess('v')` will be solved with no other equations in the same equation system, this means that `'v'` is guaranteed to not end up being solved in the same equation system as `guess('v')`, and hence that any guess value will be computed by the time it is needed.

Whether the initialization parameters for `'v'` end up being used or not depends on the initializability of `'v'`.  Since the initializability isn't known until after processing the equations of the initialization problem, the actual role of `start('v')` and `guess('v')` cannot be understood without a deeper analysis, and may even be tool-dependent (due to differences in selection of default initialization equations, equation tearing, etc).

A simulation result is not required to contain values for any of the initialization parameters.  Hence, a tool may find that a single memory location is enough to represent both `start('v')`, `guess('v')`, and `'v'`.

### Flat Modelica parameter declaration equations

For convenience, a Flat Modelica parameter declaration may have a declaration equation,
```
parameter Real 'p' = <expr>;
```
This is a shorthand notation for the following initialization of the parameter:
```
  parameter Real 'p';
initial equation
  start('p') := <expr>;
```

**This is how it works:** Since the initialization of `'p'` is under-determined, the default initialization equation `'p' = guess('p')` is implicit, and the default causal initial equation for `guess('p')` makes the connection to `start('p')` (meaning it will be possible to override `<expr>` after translation).

The use of a declaration equation in Flat Modelica is not an option for a full Modelica `final` parameter.  In Flat Modelica, this is expressed by giving an equation directly for `'p'`:
```
  parameter Real 'p';
initial equation
  'p' := <expr>;
```
Here, `start('p')` and `guess('p')` never come into play for the initialization of `'p'`.

## Reducing full Modelica initialization to Flat Modelica (IN PROGRESS)

To show that the initialization model described above for Flat Modelica has the expressive power to deal with full Modelica initialization, this section will show how the full Modelica concepts involved in initialization can be reduced to Flat Modelica.  At intermediate stages of this reduction process, a mix of full Modelica and Flat Modelica will be used, but this shouldn't cause too much confusion since very few constructs are shared.

### Full Modelica declaration equations

Since the presence of declaration equations are among the things adding to the complexity of variable initialization sementics in full Modelica, the first step of transforming the initialization to Flat Modelica is to get rid of declaration equations for all variables except constants.  (Due to the special requirements on constants in Flat Modelica, it makes good sense to require a constant to be given by a declaration equation.)  A declaration equation is transformed into modification of `start`, an `initial equation` or a normal `equation`, depending on variability and `fixed`, as described below.

For a (full Modelica) variable with declaration equation and `fixed = true`, the only variability to consider is `parameter`.  Then, this combination has the special interpretation that the `start` shall be ignored in favor of the declaration equation, and there is (as defined currently) no way to set a guess value for the event that the parameter ends up in a nonlinear equation system.  Hence, the parameter (only writing out the default `fixed = true` for clarity)
```
parameter Real p(start = <foo>, fixed = true) = <binding>;
```
is transformed into
```
parameter Real p(start = <binding>, fixed = true);
```
Before applying this rewriting rule, one must first issue any warning in case `p` has a present `start` with `fixed = true` but no declaration equation.

If the `start` is removed in the example above, we get the most basic form of full Modelica parameter initialization:
```
parameter Real p = <binding>; /* (A parameter has fixed = true by default.) */
```
This is rewritten in the same way as when `start` was present:
```
parameter Real p(start = <binding>, fixed = true);
```

For a variable with declaration equation and `fixed = false`, the `start` is always a guess value, and the declaration equation simply moved to either `initial equation` (for parameters) or `equation` (otherwise).  This is done using a causal equation, so that variability checking isn't affected (**but also meaning the equation isn't allowed in a system of equations — this might be too restrictive!**).  For example,
```
Real y(start = <guess>, fixed = false) = <binding>;
```
becomes
```
  Real y(start = <guess>, fixed = false);
equation
  y := <binding>;
```

### Reduction of `fixed`

We begin by considering variables with non-`final` modification of `start`.

A full Modelica parameter with `fixed = true` (and no declaration equation) is interpreted in the simplest possible way, as full Modelica provides no way of specifying the corresponding guess value:
```
parameter Real p(start = <exact>, fixed = true);
```
In Flat Modelica, the `start` attribute only provides the default for `start('p')`:
```
  parameter Real 'p'(start = <exact>);
initial equation
  'p' := start('p'); /* May differ from 'start' attribute. */
```
(Since `start('p')` is assumed not being solved in a nonlinear equation system, the initializability of `p` is _exact_.)

When the full Modelica parameter has `fixed = false`, there will also be a corresponding equation somewhere else:
```
parameter Real p(start = <guess>, fixed = false);
```
In Flat Modelica all we need to do is drop the `fixed`, as the guess value for a variable in a nonlinear system is always `start('p')`:
```
  parameter Real 'p'(start = <guess>);
```
(A tool will need to analyze the equations in order to tell whether `start('p')` is ever used, marking the difference between `approx` and `calculated` initializability of `p`.)


### Rewriting of `final`

#### Using causal equation

The rule above for introducing the hidden equation for `start('v')` was made so that a causal equation can be used to express `final` as follows.

First, `final` modification of `start` with `fixed = true`:
```
parameter Real p(final start = <exact>, fixed = true);
```
In Flat Modelica, the key part of the `final` can be expressed by bypassing `start('p')` in the `initial equation`:
```
  parameter Real 'p'; /* No need to keep 'start' attribute. */
initial equation
  'p' := <exact>; /* Cannot be part of system of equations; won't need guess. */
```

If the parameter `p` is replaced by the non-parameter `v`,
```
Real v(final start = <exact>, fixed = true);
```
a non-causal equation is used instead, and one can prevent `guess('v')` from being modified after translation:
```
  Real 'v';
initial equation
  'v' = <exact>;
  guess('v') := <exact>;
```
Since Full Modelica cannot distinguish between the two different uses of `<exact>`, it could also be acceptable for the Flat Modelica equations to replace the equation for `guess('v')` by one for `start('v')`:
```
  Real 'v';
initial equation
  'v' := <exact>; /* Equation cannot be overridden, but can be part of system of equations. */
  start('v') := <exact>; /* Overridable guess value. */
```

#### Possible variation: Built-in attribute `start_final`

By introducing a built-in attribute called `start_final` (`false` by default), the use of a causal equation assigning to `start('p')` can be replaced by a small modification of the hidden equation:
```
start('p') :=
  if not 'p'.start_final and userOverridesStart('p') then
    getUserStart('p')
  else
    <expr>;
```

For a non-parameter,
```
Real v(final start = <exact>, fixed = true);
```
we can use `start_final` to express two alternatives for how to treat the guess value:
```
  parameter Real 'v'(start = <exact>, start_final = false); /* Allow guess value to be changed after translation. */
  parameter Real 'v'(start = <exact>, start_final = true); /* Don't allow changing guess value. */
initial equation
  'v' := <exact>; /* May need guess value */
```

Commit message:

Add rather obvious section on how to reduce built-in attribute 'start'

RationaleMCP/0031/initialization.md, after:

# Initialization of variables

The concepts used to define how a variable is initialized are different in Flat Modelica compared to full Modelica.  What is described here is thus a replacement for what in full Modelica is a combination of `final`, `start`, `fixed`, declaration equation, and `initial equation`.  The goal is to reduce the number of concepts involved, and making it more clear how the initialization problem is parameterized (that is, what freedom there is to steer the initialization after translation by setting initialization parameters).

The `initial equation` concept is the same in Flat Modelica as in full Modelica, and any `initial equation` in a full Modelica model will be preserved in the Flat Modelica model.  However, the Flat Modelica model may contain additional `initial equation` coming from the rewriting of other concepts.

## Benefits

To not share the full Modelica initialization model means that there will be a price in terms of lack of specification reuse between full Modelica and Flat Modelica.  The benefits of the new initialization model that make it worth the price include:
- The Flat Modelica initalization model relies more on the use of equations, making more of the initialization explicit in the model.
- The possibility to alter start values after translation is more explicit.
- Not using the `start` attribute means that we can get rid of one more variable attribute with non-constant variability.  This leaves only the potential need for `nominal` to be discrete-time, but it should be possible to get rid of in a similar manner to `start`.

Drawbacks:
- Not using the `start` attribute means that we cannot embedd this information in a type; something like a record with equations would be needed to bundle an equation for `start('v')` with the variable `'v'` in a type.
- Not using attributes `start` and `fixed` means more separation of the declaration of a variable and the things involved in its initialization.

## Limitations

Since a constant in Flat Modelica can always be evaluated during translation, constants are excluded from the current discussion of variable initialization.

The initialization of variables described here is currently restricted to non-discrete-time `Real` variables `'v'`, with no appearance of `pre('v')` in the model equations.  Generalization to discrete-time variables and general handling of `pre` should be made analogously to full Modelica, but the details have not yet been considered.

## Causal equation

In the following, an equation in the form
```
equation /* or 'initial equation' */
  <var> := <expr>;
```
is an equation with prescribed causality, meaning that the perfect matching rule is only allowed to match the equation to the variable on the left hand side, and that the variability of `<expr>` must not exceed the variability of `<var>`.

When `<var>` is a parameter, it is illegal for the causal equation to end up in an equation system together with other equations.  This is a natural way to capture the full Modelica requirement that the must not be any cyclic dependencies between parameters.

When a causal equation exists with `<var>` on the left hand side, we say that `<var>` _has a causal equation_.  Determining the set of variables having causal equation just requires a scan of the model equations, and testing whether a variable has a causal equation then becomes a constant time operation.

## Flat Modelica variable initialization

The initialization of the `Real` variable `'v'` is described using the associated _initialization parameters_ `start('v')` and `guess('v')`.  The initialization parameters are not declared separately, but exist implicitly for any non-constant variable `'v'`.  (Here, `start('v')` takes the role of the full Modelica built-in attribute `start`.)  There are no built-in attributes of `'v'` involved in the initialization process.

The initialization parameters must be determined by causal initial equations.  When an initialization parameter doesn't have a causal equation, the following are used:
```
initial equation
  /* Default causal equation for start('v') */
  start('v') := 0.0;

  /* Default causal equation for guess('v') */
  guess('v') :=
    if userOverridesStart('v') then
      getUserStart('v')
    else
      start('v');
```

Here `userOverridesStart` and `getUserStart` represent tool-specific ways to set parameters of the translated model's initialization problem.

Similar to causal equations for parameters, a causal equations for an initialization parameter may not end up in an equation system together with other equations.  Among other, this means that solving for the initialization parameters will never require guess values for the initialization parameters themselves.

(Note that providing a non-causal equation that can only be solved for, say, `start('v')` will result in an overdetermined initialization problem, as the addition of the default causal equation will result in two equations that can only be solved for the same variable.)

Like in full Modelica, the initialization equations provided by a Flat Modelica model are generally forming an underdetermined system of equations for the initialization of all variables.  The given equations are extended with default
equations in the following form, so that a well-determined (balanced) system of equations is obtained:
```
'v' := guess('v');
```
(The default equation could also be given as a non-causal equation, as the known existence of a causal equation for `guess('v')` implies that the default equation would only be possible to solve for `'v'`.)

In addition, if `'v'` needs a guess value for initialization, the guess is taken from `guess('v')`.  Hence, any equation where `'v'` occurs has a hidden dependency on the causal equation for `guess('v')`.  Since the causal equation for `guess('v')` will be solved with no other equations in the same equation system, this means that `'v'` is guaranteed to not end up being solved in the same equation system as `guess('v')`, and hence that any guess value will be computed by the time it is needed.

Whether the initialization parameters for `'v'` end up being used or not depends on the initializability of `'v'`.  Since the initializability isn't known until after processing the equations of the initialization problem, the actual role of `start('v')` and `guess('v')` cannot be understood without a deeper analysis, and may even be tool-dependent (due to differences in selection of default initialization equations, equation tearing, etc).

A simulation result is not required to contain values for any of the initialization parameters.  Hence, a tool may find that a single memory location is enough to represent both `start('v')`, `guess('v')`, and `'v'`.

### Flat Modelica parameter declaration equations

For convenience, a Flat Modelica parameter declaration may have a declaration equation,
```
parameter Real 'p' = <expr>;
```
This is a shorthand notation for the following initialization of the parameter:
```
  parameter Real 'p';
initial equation
  start('p') := <expr>;
```

**This is how it works:** Since the initialization of `'p'` is under-determined, the default initialization equation `'p' = guess('p')` is implicit, and the default causal initial equation for `guess('p')` makes the connection to `start('p')` (meaning it will be possible to override `<expr>` after translation).

The use of a declaration equation in Flat Modelica is not an option for a full Modelica `final` parameter.  In Flat Modelica, this is expressed by giving an equation directly for `'p'`:
```
  parameter Real 'p';
initial equation
  'p' := <expr>;
```
Here, `start('p')` and `guess('p')` never come into play for the initialization of `'p'`.

## Reducing full Modelica initialization to Flat Modelica (IN PROGRESS)

To show that the initialization model described above for Flat Modelica has the expressive power to deal with full Modelica initialization, this section will show how the full Modelica concepts involved in initialization can be reduced to Flat Modelica.  At intermediate stages of this reduction process, a mix of full Modelica and Flat Modelica will be used, but this shouldn't cause too much confusion since very few constructs are shared.

### Full Modelica declaration equations

Since the presence of declaration equations are among the things adding to the complexity of variable initialization sementics in full Modelica, the first step of transforming the initialization to Flat Modelica is to get rid of declaration equations for all variables except constants.  (Due to the special requirements on constants in Flat Modelica, it makes good sense to require a constant to be given by a declaration equation.)  A declaration equation is transformed into modification of `start`, an `initial equation` or a normal `equation`, depending on variability and `fixed`, as described below.

For a (full Modelica) variable with declaration equation and `fixed = true`, the only variability to consider is `parameter`.  Then, this combination has the special interpretation that the `start` shall be ignored in favor of the declaration equation, and there is (as defined currently) no way to set a guess value for the event that the parameter ends up in a nonlinear equation system.  Hence, the parameter (only writing out the default `fixed = true` for clarity)
```
parameter Real p(start = <foo>, fixed = true) = <binding>;
```
is transformed into
```
parameter Real p(start = <binding>, fixed = true);
```
Before applying this rewriting rule, one must first issue any warning in case `p` has a present `start` with `fixed = true` but no declaration equation.

If the `start` is removed in the example above, we get the most basic form of full Modelica parameter initialization:
```
parameter Real p = <binding>; /* (A parameter has fixed = true by default.) */
```
This is rewritten in the same way as when `start` was present:
```
parameter Real p(start = <binding>, fixed = true);
```

For a variable with declaration equation and `fixed = false`, the `start` is always a guess value, and the declaration equation simply moved to either `initial equation` (for parameters) or `equation` (otherwise).  This is done using a causal equation, so that variability checking isn't affected (**but also meaning the equation isn't allowed in a system of equations — this might be too restrictive!**).  For example,
```
Real y(start = <guess>, fixed = false) = <binding>;
```
becomes
```
  Real y(start = <guess>, fixed = false);
equation
  y := <binding>;
```

### Reduction of `fixed`

We begin by considering variables with non-`final` modification of `start`.

A full Modelica parameter with `fixed = true` (and no declaration equation) is interpreted in the simplest possible way, as full Modelica provides no way of specifying the corresponding guess value:
```
parameter Real p(start = <exact>, fixed = true);
```
In Flat Modelica, the `start` attribute only provides the default for `start('p')`:
```
  parameter Real 'p'(start = <exact>);
initial equation
  'p' := start('p'); /* May differ from 'start' attribute. */
```
(Since `start('p')` is assumed not being solved in a nonlinear equation system, the initializability of `p` is _exact_.)

When the full Modelica parameter has `fixed = false`, there will also be a corresponding equation somewhere else:
```
parameter Real p(start = <guess>, fixed = false);
```
In Flat Modelica all we need to do is drop the `fixed`, as the guess value for a variable in a nonlinear system is always `start('p')`:
```
  parameter Real 'p'(start = <guess>);
```
(A tool will need to analyze the equations in order to tell whether `start('p')` is ever used, marking the difference between `approx` and `calculated` initializability of `p`.)

### Reduction of `start`

Here, only non-`final` modification of `start` is considered; the case of a `final` modification will be considered in the next section.

Above, it has been said that the full Modelica attribute `start` only provides the default for `start('p')`.  What this means is simply that we now transform
```
  Real 'x'(start = <expr>);
```
into
```
  Real 'x';
initial equation
  start('x') := <expr>;
```

### Rewriting of `final`

#### Using causal equation

The rule above for introducing the hidden equation for `start('v')` was made so that a causal equation can be used to express `final` as follows.

First, `final` modification of `start` with `fixed = true`:
```
parameter Real p(final start = <exact>, fixed = true);
```
In Flat Modelica, the key part of the `final` can be expressed by bypassing `start('p')` in the `initial equation`:
```
  parameter Real 'p'; /* No need to keep 'start' attribute. */
initial equation
  'p' := <exact>; /* Cannot be part of system of equations; won't need guess. */
```

If the parameter `p` is replaced by the non-parameter `v`,
```
Real v(final start = <exact>, fixed = true);
```
a non-causal equation is used instead, and one can prevent `guess('v')` from being modified after translation:
```
  Real 'v';
initial equation
  'v' = <exact>;
  guess('v') := <exact>;
```
Since Full Modelica cannot distinguish between the two different uses of `<exact>`, it could also be acceptable for the Flat Modelica equations to replace the equation for `guess('v')` by one for `start('v')`:
```
  Real 'v';
initial equation
  'v' := <exact>; /* Equation cannot be overridden, but can be part of system of equations. */
  start('v') := <exact>; /* Overridable guess value. */
```

#### Possible variation: Built-in attribute `start_final`

By introducing a built-in attribute called `start_final` (`false` by default), the use of a causal equation assigning to `start('p')` can be replaced by a small modification of the hidden equation:
```
start('p') :=
  if not 'p'.start_final and userOverridesStart('p') then
    getUserStart('p')
  else
    <expr>;
```

For a non-parameter,
```
Real v(final start = <exact>, fixed = true);
```
we can use `start_final` to express two alternatives for how to treat the guess value:
```
  parameter Real 'v'(start = <exact>, start_final = false); /* Allow guess value to be changed after translation. */
  parameter Real 'v'(start = <exact>, start_final = true); /* Don't allow changing guess value. */
initial equation
  'v' := <exact>; /* May need guess value */
```
