# BaseModelica Interest Group web meeting Jan. 28, 2026

## Agenda

* Status on CI pipeline with OpenModelica generated Base Modelica parsed by BaseModelica.jl 
* Base Modelica standardization go forward plan

## Participants

* [x] Oliver Lenord (Bosch)
* [x] Fabian Jarmolowitz (Bosch)
* [x] Christian Bertch (Bosch)
* [x] Christoff Bürger (Dassault Systemes)
* [ ] Gerd Kurzbach (ESI)
* [ ] Erik Danielsson (COMSOL)
* [ ] Jeff Hiller (COMSOL)
* [x] Francesco Casella (Politecnico di Milano, OSMC), hindered
* [ ] Martin Sjölund (LiU, OSMC)
* [ ] Henrik Tidefelt (Wolfram), not available
* [ ] Hauke Neitzel (DIgSILENT)
* [ ] Ingo Czerwinski (DIgSILENT)
* [ ] Johannes Ruess (DIgSILENT)
* [ ] Chris Rackauckas (JuliaHub)
* [ ] Jadon Clugston (JuliaHub)
* [x] Joel Andersson (CasADi)
* [x] Joris Gillis (CasADi)
* [x] James Goppert (Purdue University)
* [ ] Micah Condie (Purdue University)
* [x] Abigail Woodbury (Purdue University)

## Topics:
- Status update on Base Modelica prototypical implementations
  - Including rumoca
  - Base Modelica to CasaDi through FMI Import by Joris
  - Alternative Base Modelica in ONNX approach by Joris
- Discuss cross check results
  - First test results of Base Modelica generated by OpenModelica and imported into ModelingToolkit.jl
  - Including examples designed to showcase Base Modelica language features
  - Apply compiler settings that will lead to the discussed simplified Base Modelica [Francesco] 
  - Prepare few minimal examples highlighting the Base Modelica simplifying language features. [Francesco, Henrik]
  - Feedback from Jadon how valuable he considers theses features.
- Discuss risks of Base Modelica not being a pure subset of Modelica
  - Benefits and risks of Base Modelica being a pure subset of Modelica

## Meeting notes

### Base Modelica in ONNX through lace modelica by Joris

Open Source package [lace modelica](https://github.com/yacoda/lacemodelica)
- Base Modelica to AST
- Export
  - FMI model description xml
  - ONNX (Open Neural Network Exchange)
    - direct acyclic expression graph
      - incl. loops, functions
    - ls-onnx-serialization proposed layered standard 
      - mapping from Base Modelica grammar
      - representation of the DAE
      - variable to nodes and expr to edges
      - support of loops, functions as subgraphs
- CasADi integration
  - read Base Modelica through DAEbuild() relying on ls-onnx-serialization

Why go through the onnx represenation instead of parsing Base Modelica?

ONNX is reaching a much broader audience.
Opportunity to join forces to build upon a common base.

Base Modelica has the strict requirements to preserve the simulation semantics.
But, Base Modelica is awfully complicated due to arrays, records, Modelica functions.

One problem about optimization is the lack of representing events, which is very well handled in Modelica.


### Testing OpenModelica to BaseModelica.jl

Francesco: Now some 10 models can be translated but we won't get anywhere, when there is no support for conditional equations.
Tickets have been opened, I will follow-up with Jadon so see if we can get them fixed.


### Discuss risks of Base Modelica not being a pure subset of Modelica

This shall be the focus topic for next meeting.
Especially representatives from the MAP_LANG need to present.

The goal should be to have list of pros and cons, risks aligned among ourselves to be able to discuss this in a larger group from MAP_LANG.

Import criterion is the benefit of new language constructs going beyond Modelica.
Examples need to be prepared for discussion with non-Modelica tool vendors.
There has been no time to work on the initialization examples, but this should be done to start with.

## Topics for next meeting

- Base Modelica being a pure subset of Modelica or not
  - risks, pros and cons

## Next Meeting

Wed. Feb 25, 2026, 16.30-18.00 CET 

Meeting invite has been sent out.
